Purpose
The Software Requirements Specification (SRS) will provide a detailed description of the
requirements for the Hotel Management System (HMS). This SRS will allow for a complete
understanding of what is to be expected from the newly introduced system which is to be
constructed. The clear understanding of the system and its’ functionality will allow for the correct
software to be developed for the end user and will be used for the development of the future stages
of the project. This SRS will provide the foundation for the project. From this SRS, the Hotel
Management System can be designed, constructed, and finally tested.
This SRS will be used by the system development team which is constructing the HMS and the
hotel end users. The Project team will use the SRS to fully understand the expectations of this HMS
to construct the appropriate software. The hotel end users will be able to use this SRS as a “test” to
see if the constructing team will be constructing the system to their expectations. If it is not to their
expectations the end users can specify how it is not to their liking and the team will change the SRS
to fit the end users’ needs.


Project Scope
The software product to be produced is a Hotel Management System which will automate the major
hotel operations. The first subsystem is a Reservation and Booking System to keep track of
reservations and room availability. The second subsystem is the Tracking and Selling Food System
that charges the current room. The third subsystem is a General Management Services and
Automated Tasks System which generates reports to audit all hotel operations and allows
modification of subsystem information. These three subsystems’ functionality will be described in
detail in section 2-Overall Description.
There are two end users for the HMS. The end users are the hotel staff (customer service
representative) and hotel managers. Both user types can access the Reservation and Booking
System and the Food Tracking and Selling System. The General Management System will be
restricted to management users.
The Hotel Management System’s objectives is to provide a system to manage a hotel that has
increased in size to a total of 100 rooms. Without automation the management of the hotel has
become an unwieldy task. The end users’ day-to-day jobs of managing a hotel will be simplified by
a considerable amount through the automated system. The system will be able to handle many
services to take care of all customers in a quick manner. The system should be user appropriate,
easy to use, provide easy recovery of errors and have an overall end user high subjective
satisfaction.
User Classes and Characteristics
User Classes
There are three user levels in Hotel Management System.
1. Owner
2. Manager
3. Receptionist
Characteristics of User Classes
Owner: -
Hotel owner has the privilege of Monitoring and authorization of all the tasks handle by the system.
He can access every function performed by the system. Owner of the company as well as the system
can access to the administration panel which is consider the core of the system. As the main
authorized person of the company owner gets the ability to manage the other users including their
user levels and privileges. Taking backups of the system and restoring system can also be done by
the Owner. Meanwhile he will be able to take all the kinds of reports available in the system. As the
owner of the system and the company he has the power to set room rates as well. Hotel owner has
the sole right of deleting a staff member from the system database.


Manager:
Manager is responsible for managing resources available in hotel management system. Manager
also has most of the privileges mentioned above except the things regarding the payment handling.
The reason for using a Manager is to reduce the workload done by the owner that cannot be
assigned to the receptionist, as those tasks seem much responsible. The user level, Manager has the
authority to take all the reports available in the system but here also except the reports related to
financial stuff, hotel income. Manager has other abilities that receptionist, user level has. Such as,
adding new staff member to the system, modifying them or removing them, adding new guests to
the system, modifying them and removing them from the system, adding new inventory to the
system, modifying them and removing them. Adding new room types to the system, modifying
them and removing them.
Receptionist:
As a hotel receptionist, he or her role will be to attain the goals of bookings and to ensure that all
guests are treated with a high standard of customer service. Hierarchically receptionist role has the
least accessibility to the system functions. Receptionist plays the boundary role of the system. He or
she can perform limited functions such as registering new guest to the system, make reservations,
Sending e-mail reminders to clients for booking confirmation. Management of hotel will prefer to
hire receptionist who have a good standard of general education and possibly in subjects such as
English, math and IT.


System Features
1. Sometimes it happens that the rooms get booked soon when one visits the place therefore
user can make advance booking using this system.
2. It saves user time in search of rooms.
3. The system is useful as it calculates an exact cost for requested number of days.
4. It saves organization resources and expenses.
5. This system is effective and saves time and cost of users.
6. The system is portable i.e. cab ne used from anywhere.
7. Easy registration.
Functional Requirements
1. Make Reservation
2. Search Room
3. Add Payment
4. Issue Bills
5. Manage Guest (Add, Update Guest)
6. Manage Room Detail (Add, Update, Delete)
7. Manage Inventory (Add, Edit, Delete)
8. Manage Staff (Add, Update, Delete, View)
9. Set Rates
10. Retrieves reports (Staff payment, Income)
11. Manage Users (Add, Update, Delete)
12. Taking Backups
13. Email notification
